https://toxicfreefuture.org/toxic-chemicals/

1. Antimony  - in nature with lead and zinc
   in metal alloys, paints, ceramics, fireworksr, disposable plastic bottles
   Effects hair, lung , and heart problems
   Exposure: water/air from power pant/vehicles
             house dust from consumer products
   Concern: Antimony trioxide is carcinogen
   Action:  avoid flame retardants, plastic water bottles

2. Antioxidants - plastic food packaging stabilizers
    butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT)
    effects liver, spleen, and kidney problems
    Exposure: lip/hair products, sunscreen, fragrances, and deodorants
              polyethylene (food/drink containers) (considered non-hazardous)
              polypropylene (heat tolerant, in Tupperware, yogurt containers..)
              plastic/wax food liners
              food to preserve fats
    Action:  change government policies

3. APEs (Alkylphenols and their ethoxylates) -
   detergent surfactants, pesticides, personal care
   effects reproductive, neurological, immune heath
   Exposure: US house dust, air, water food
             commercial laundry detergents
             (found in urine & blood)
             APEs breal down to nonylphenol and octylphenol (60 yr half-life)
    Action:  change government policies

4. Asbestos
  roofing materials and disc brake pads,
  airborne when insulation, flooring, and ceiling tiles become old and flakes

5. Bisphenols
  Bisphenols are widely-used chemicals found in everything from food and beverage can linings to thermal paper and used to make polycarbonate plastic as well as epoxy resins.

6. Formaldehyde
  Formaldehyde is widely used in many consumer products, including building materials, pressed wood, cosmetics, shoe-care products, and textiles. It is also used as a disinfectant and as a preservative, including in mortuaries and medical labs. It has been identified as a cause of leukemia and nose and throat cancer, and linked to asthma and skin irritations.

7. Mercury and Arsenic
  Mercury, arsenic, and lead are found naturally in the earth, but just because they’re natural chemical elements doesn’t mean they’re harmless. They are heavy metals with a long history of industrial and personal use—and just as long of a history of harming human health.
  An aerosol can spraying

9. Hexane
  Hexane is a solvent widely used as an industrial cleaner and degreaser and is an ingredient in many consumer products. Easily inhaled or absorbed through the skin, hexane has been recognized for more than 40 years to cause long-lasting and even permanent nerve damage in feet, legs, hands, and arms.

10. Hexavalent Chromium
  A legacy pollutant that can contaminate soil and water supplies for decades, hexavalent chromium is a widespread contaminant at hazardous waste sites and in drinking water.

11. Lead
  Lead is found naturally in the earth, but just because it’s natural chemical elements doesn’t mean it’s harmless. It is a heavy metal with a long history of industrial and personal use—and just as long of a history of harming human health. It has actually been recorded to be harmful as early as 2,000 BC!

12. Methylene Chloride
  Easily inhaled, methylene chloride converts to carbon monoxide once inside the body—making it especially dangerous for people with heart or lung disease, and pregnant women.

13. NMP (N-Methylpyrrolidone)
  N-Methylpyrrolidone (a.k.a. 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone or NMP) is a solvent used in a variety of industries and applications, such as paint and coating removal, petrochemical processing, engineering plastics coatings, agricultural chemicals, electronic cleaning and industrial/domestic cleaning.

14. Organotins
  Organotins have been widely used as pesticides and plastics additives. Some are highly toxic to aquatic life or known hormone disruptors.

15. Parabens
  Parabens have been identified as endocrine disruptors by the EU, Maine and Washington. They mimic the hormones that control functions like growth and sexual development.

16. PCBs and DDT
  PCBs - polychlorinated biphenyls - are synthetic (human-made) chemicals first produced in the late 1920s. They were used as cooling fluids in electrical equipment and machinery because of their durability and resistance to fire. DDT - dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane - was developed as an insecticide in the 1940s, and was widely used during World War II to combat insect-borne diseases.

17. Persistent, Bioaccumulative and Toxic Chemicals (PBTs)
  Chemicals that are persistent in the environment, bioaccumulate in people and/or wildlife, and are toxic are called PBTs. Because of these features, as long as they remain in commerce and may therefore be released into the environment, they will threaten the health of humans and wildlife.

18. Pesticides
  Pesticides are chemicals used to kill pests, such as insects or weeds. Many different kinds of synthetic (human-made) pesticides are used in agriculture or in home-use products.

19. PFAS “Forever Chemicals”
  PFAS, or poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances, have become notorious as drinking water contaminants as a result of industrial releases and use of firefighting foam. But they are used in a wide range of products, from food packaging to stain-resistant furniture, and our exposure comes from multiple sources and routes. PFAS have become global pollutants that threaten the health of people and wildlife.

20. Phthalates
  Phthalates are plasticizers and fragrance carriers used in a wide array of consumer products, especially those containing PVC (polyvinyl chloride).

21 Styrene
  This petroleum by-product is used to make Styrofoam™, plastics, rubber, and resins. It can put people at increased risk for cancer and other diseases.

22 TCE (Trichloroethylene)
  Tricholoroethylene (TCE) is used as a solvent for metals degreasing, as a spot cleaner in dry cleaning, and in other consumer products. EPA classifies TCE as carcinogenic to humans by all routes of exposure.
  Kid watching TV that may contain toxic flame retardants.

23. Toxic Flame Retardants
  From our TVs to our automobiles, furniture and building materials, dangerous cancer-causing and brain-harming flame retardants are used in the name of fire safety when safer alternatives are available.

24. Triclosan
  This pesticide is found in products like toothpaste, cutting boards, yoga mats, hand soap, and cosmetics. It is a hormone disruptor and encourages the growth of drug-resistant bacteria.

25. Vinyl Chloride
  Vinyl chloride is used to make polyvinyl chloride (PVC). From production through disposal, vinyl chloride threatens health and contaminates the environment.
