1.  flu
    RNA in Orthomyxovirus family
    Lipip envelope (hemagglutinin & Neuraminidase)/ capsid / RNA
       hemagglutinin: glycoprotein binds to sialic acid on host cells
         causes red blood cells to clump together
           sialic acid in immune cells, red blood cells, epithelial cells, and neurons
       Neuraminidase: enzyme helps virus leave host cell
         removes sialic acid, detach from host cell
         antigenic
         target of oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and zanamivir (Relenza)
       capsid: structural support
      epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract;
         nose, sinuses, pharynx, and larynx
      neuroinflammation, neurodegeneration; attacks central nervous system  &brain cells
      Primary reservoir: birds

2. RSV Respiratory syncytial virus
   nose, throat, and lungs;  cough, sneeze, or kiss
   humans only reservoir
   single-stranded RNA virus in the Paramyxoviridae family
  Lipip envelope + attachment(G), fusion(F), small hydrophobic protein/ matrix protein/ RNA
  Ciliated epithelial cells in  trachea and bronchial tubes

3. COVID
   Coronaviruses MERS, SARS
   Alveolar epithelial cell type II (in lungs)
   protein envelope +spike glycoprotein/RNA
   reservoir horseshoe bats?

4. norovirus
    non-enveloped, icosahedral structure single-stranded RNA virus
    Capsid protein
   humans only reservoir
   contaminated food/water or contact with an infected person.
   vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, nausea, and low-grade fever
   infects intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) and immune cells in the gut, including macrophages, dendritic cells, T cells, and B cells

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Respiratory viruses
  Respiratory upper or lower parts of your respiratory tract.

  Common symptoms of a respiratory viral disease include:

  runny or stuffy nose
  coughing or sneezing
  fever
  body aches
  Examples
  Examples of respiratory diseases include:

  flu
  common cold
  respiratory syncytial virus infection
  adenovirus infection
  parainfluenza virus infection
  severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)

  Transmission
  droplets generated through coughing or sneezing talking.
  touch your nose or eyes, you could develop a disease.

  nasal decongestants, cough suppressants, and pain relievers, reduce symptoms.


Gastrointestinal viral diseases
  gastroenteritis; stomach flu.
  abdominal cramps, diarrhea, vomiting

  norovirus
  rotavirus
  some adenovirus
  astrovirus

  Food or water by feces contamination
  sharing utensils or personal objects.

  drink plenty of fluids

  Prevention
   washing your hands after bathroom. Wiping down contaminated surfaces
   not sharing personal items or eating utensils.


Exanthematous
  skin rashes.

  highly contagious.

  measles
  rubella
  chickenpox/shingles
  roseola
  smallpox
  fifth disease
  chikungunya

  cough or sneeze talk

  chickenpox and smallpox, can be transmitted by contacting skin lesions.
  Shingles: reactivation of the varicella-zoster (chickenpox)virus in your cells.
  Chikungunya through a mosquito bite, not person to person.

  Fever-reducing medications,  acetaminophen.
  acyclovir  for chickenpox or shingles.

  Measles, rubella, chickenpox, shingles, and smallpox vaccination.

viral hepatitis
  inflammation of the liver, most common hepatitis A, B, and C.

  hepatitis A
  hepatitis B
  hepatitis C
  hepatitis D
  hepatitis E
  cytomegalovirus
  yellow fever virus


  Hepatitis B, C through bodily fluids. needles or razors
  Hepatitis B can be spread through sexual contact.
  hepatitis A, E by consuming food or water from human feces.
  Can get hepatitis D if you have hepatitis B virus.

  hepatitis B, C, and D focus on managing symptoms, or antiviral drugs.
  hepatitis A and E: rest, drinking fluids, and avoiding alcohol.
  vaccines hepatitis A, B, E(not available in the U.S.)

  not sharing needles or razors, practicing safe sex
  avoiding contaminated food or drinks that may be contaminated by feces.

Cutaneous viral diseases
  lesions or papules on the skin.  maybe for a long time or come back.

  warts, including genital warts
  oral herpes
  genital herpes
  molluscum contagiosum


  contagious via close physical contact with someone or touching a towel or faucet handle.

  warts or molluscum contagiosum often go away,  or cryotherapy.
  herpes - acyclovir to shorten or prevent outbreaks.

  avoiding the sharing of personal items, and
  avoiding close contact with people who have lesions.

Hemorrhagic virues
  Damage to your circulatory system.

  high fever
  body aches
  weakness
  bleeding under the skin
  bleeding from the mouth or ears
  bleeding in internal organs

  Ebola
  Lassa fever
  dengue fever
  yellow fever
  Marburg hemorrhagic fever
  Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever

  dengue fever and yellow fever, via insect bite

  Others, such as Ebola, are spread to other people through contact with the blood or other bodily fluid of someone with the virus. Lassa fever is spread through inhaling or consuming the dried feces or urine of a rodent with the virus.

  Treatment
  There’s no specific treatment for hemorrhagic viral diseases.

  It’s important to stay hydrated if you have a viral hemorrhagic disease. Some people may need intravenous (IV) fluids to maintain electrolyte balance. Supportive care to maintain hydration and electrolyte balance is essential. In some cases, the antiviral drug ribavirin may be given.

  Prevention
  Researchers are in the process of developing vaccines for several hemorrhagic viruses. A yellow fever vaccine is currently available for people traveling to areas where yellow fever is common.

  If you live or work in an area where viral hemorrhagic diseases are common, you can do the following to reduce your risk:

  Use proper protection, such as gloves, glasses, or a face shield, when working around people who have a virus.
  Avoid being bitten by insects, especially mosquitos and ticks, by wearing protective clothing or using insect repellent.
  Protect against rodent infestation by keeping food covered, removing garbage often, and making sure windows and doors are secured properly.

Neurologic viral diseases
  Some viruses can infect the brain and surrounding tissues, causing neurologic viral diseases. This can result in a range of symptoms, including:

  fever
  confusion
  drowsiness
  seizures
  coordination problems
  Examples
  Examples of neurologic viral diseases include:

  polio
  viral meningitis
  viral encephalitis
  rabies
  Transmission
  Many neurologic viruses are spread through the bite of an infected animal or bug, such as a mosquito or tick.

  Other viruses, such poliovirus and other enteroviruses, are quite contagious and spread through close contact with someone with the virus. Contaminated objects can also contribute to the spread of these viruses.

  Treatment
  There’s no specific treatment for people with mild viral meningitis or encephalitis. Getting plenty of rest, staying hydrated, and taking OTC anti-inflammatories to ease pain or headaches can all help. In some cases, antiviral medication may be prescribed.

  Polio or severe cases of meningitis or encephalitis may require additional treatment, such as breathing assistance or IV fluids.

  If an animal that’s suspected to have the rabies virus bites you, you’ll be given a series of shots to help prevent the rabies virus from infecting you.

  Prevention
  There’s a vaccine for both poliovirus and the mumps virus, which can cause meningitis and encephalitis.

  Practicing good hygiene, avoiding close contact with those who have the virus, and protecting against insect bites can all help to reduce the spread of encephalitis and meningitis.

  To reduce the risk of spreading rabies, keep your pets vaccinated and avoid approaching wild animals.


