Outliers - the story of success  by Malcolm Gladwell        ðŸ—“ 2008

Intro:
   1896 Italians in Roseto Pennsylvania were outliers in longevity/lack of heart disease.
   diet studies not relevant - church, social support/activism - 2,000 population 22 civic organizations
   Goal: find explanation of outliers

1. Matthew Effect
   (Matthew 25:29 Things are given to those that have more, things are taken away from those that have less)
   40% Canadian hockey players born Jan/Feb/Mar  because of eligibility cutoff is January 1.
     One that turns 10 on Jan 1. plays with one that does not turn 10 until Dec. 31
   Most English soccer players born in Sept/Oct/Nov because of a Sep-1 cut-off
   Older kids in same grade typically score higher.

2. 10,000 rule
   Bill Joy - Sun Microsystems founder - 1970's practiced 24/7 coding in new time-sharing computer with a defect
    (entering k for time requested) that allowed him to bypass time limit & practice for 10,000 hours.

   Lennon/McCartney played from 1957, 1960 while in High school played in Hamburg - Liverpool agent was in Londo
   by chance talked to Hamburg club owner - may connections in Hamburg - had alcohol & sex and played all night.
   Lennon: in Liverpool/Hamburg played for 1/8 hours.  Hamburg 7 day/week 3 times for 106/92/48 nights.

   Bills Gates: lawyer/banker parents, 7th grade (19687) in private school that had time-sharing computer terminal,
   mothers raised for money for more computer time,
   1968 Gates began living in computer room.  1971 Gates & friends has 1,575 hours on mainframe - 8 hrs/day 7 days/weeks.
   Used free university computer from 3 to 6 am, worked for power company as an independent study project.

   20% of wealthiest people for 2,00 years are in US within 9 years of one another
    1860-1870 American transformation (biggest ever) - railroads - Wall Street (Civil War 1861-1865)
    If born in 1835 more likely to make it without rich background

   1975 Altair 8800; born before 1952 with IBM job too smug, ideal if born 1954-1955 - Gates, Jobs.. given opportunity
   to work really hard and seized it.

   (1 & 2: achievement more about opportunity than talent)

3. Trouble with geniuses, part 1
   Christopher Langan IQ 195, Einstein 150
   Psychology professor Lewis Terman: found 1,470 students with IQ > 140 (the Termites), thought they were destined...
     some became famous authors... others failures --> intellect & achievement is not correlated !
     achievement dependent on family!
   education, money, longevity âˆ IQ  (proportionality stops at IQ 120)
   IQ like basketball player height have thresholds: success beyond it is not proportional
   Nobel winners are not mostly Harvard graduates - colleges cannot be ranked.
   Admissions should be lottery based for those passing a threshold;
       27K Harvard applicants, ~3K have perfect APT scores, only 1.6K accepted - 93% rejected.
   Minorities with/without affirmative action: 10%/3% student population, have lower grades but same success as whites.
     OK if smart enough - above threshold.
   IQ (convergence) test alternative: divergent thinking or "use of objects" tests - ways of using brick
   Harvard does not test "uses of brick"  --> not all Nobel winners are from Harvard
   Langan: intellect outlier but not an achievement outlier

4. Trouble with geniuses, part 2
   Langan: dirt poor, no father, abusive step-father (--. mistrust of authority), bullied in school,
           thrown out of college because mother did not fill continue-financial forms,
           no skills to negotiate class schedule because he had no car,
           bitter and angry of missing the intellect energy ""in the air";
           Harvard is great resource if he was to be work there - but is glorified corporation, they care about
           being big shots, if you accept a paycheck you have to go along - (he has it backwards!)
           Published "Cognitive-Theoretic Model of the Universe" (CTMU) 2002
              prove the existence of god/afterlife using math;
              "can't afford to let logical approach to theology be prejudiced by religious dogma"
           Worked menial jobs - bouncer, rancher ... married chess champion
           Supports 9/11 & white genocide conspiracy theories, (9/11 was Bushes distraction to CTMU)
           against interracial marriages, dog whistle anti-Semite, alt-right champion.
           walked when 3 months old, read at age 3.
           at 50's has horse farm, read books, think of problem before going to bed and dreams of the answer
           reads Chomsky; says better to get the "original source"....
           does not think anyone is smarter than him (not boasting)
           knows that he cannot navigate the world
           --> no one including geniuses can make it alone
   Oppenheimer: did lab experiments 3rd grade, studied physics 5th.  Harvard & Cambridge had depression,
                tried to poison tutor who won Nobel because he forced him to do experimental physics
                got probation with psychiatrist visits.  fought depression

                Used charm to get the Manhattan project job (Langan antagonized calculus teacher and teacher thought
                Langan could not do math)
                son of manufacturer & artist, went to Ethical Culture school
   "practical intelligence": skill to talk out of murder charges, have real communication with teacher
       Procedural intelligence - what/when/how to talk someone for maximum effect and get what you want
       orthogonal to IQ intelligence (Oppenheimer had both, not Langan)
       Practical/IQ intelligence is learned-from/given-by family
       Richer people have more practical intelligence.
   Rich to middle-class/poor parenting  (or high/low education):
      1. heavily involved; concerted cultivation/natural growth accomplishment
         learn teamwork, customize interaction
         /good behavior, less whiny, distrust, submissive
      2. well-dressed, alert, poised / not so..
    Langan: "have not anyone able to comprehend things more than me"

5. Three Lessons of Joe Flom
   1. Advantage of being Jewish (underdog)
       Joe Flom, Jewish lawyer; Mr. Takeover; poor immigrant parents, grew in depression
       Hostile takeovers were disapproved &  handled by second rate Jewish (non-Nordic) lawyers - Joe Flom.
       Then (hostile) takeovers 100% approved, Joe Flom with 10,000 hours practice was ready
   2. Demographic luck
       Born before 1911 - 20-30 years old during great depression 1929-1939
       After 1912 - got out of college end of depression
       1930's demographic trough; lowest birthrate - kids grow up with more attention more college choices and
       more lawyer-job opportunities to service later baby boomers
       ---> sense of possibility comes from inside us, out parents, and time
   3. Garment industry
       East European Jews, prohibited from owning land, were shopkeepers, dress makers...
         makers - coming to America and "worked like madmen at what they knew"
         came right time with right skills - in 3 years had 20 people working for them
           form 1880 to 1950 more clothes make in NY than any other place
           in the world; 16,000companies
         had autonomy, complexity, connection of effort and reward
         type of work, not money, fulfills people
         hard work is a prison sentence if it does not have meaning
         By seeing the entrepreneur parents, children learned how to assert.
           and become lawyers doctors...
         But garment workers was brutal - worked 84/week average
         Oppenheimer's father was a clothes manufacturer
       Italians Irish did not have urban skills - were laborers
       Mexican became feudal workers in Mexico
    Success is not random - lots of precedents to become a lawyer.....
      culture, generational/family history

6. Legacy - Harlan Kentucky
,    Howard/Turner feud has dozens killed;
       mother told gunshot victim to die like a man, and he did
     Similar in other towns; up to 2 hour battles of 100 men; after civil war
       > 1,000 murder cases
     "Culture of honor": a violence pattern - not isolated feuds
       in rocky infertile lands; Sicily, Basque - herders not farmers
       herds easily stolen, but crops; fight aggressively for reputation
       --> man's reputation is his livelihood  & self-worth
          stone thrown on his herd requires violent response
       Scottish-Irish immigrants were at home in lawless southern borderlands
       South homicides - murder and victim know the reason
         no "stranger" killings
     Weary of racial/ethnic stereotypes: want to believe we are no prisoners
       of ethnic history.
       But understand Kentucky killings -need to go back 400-500 years in Britain
          --> look at cultural legacies
    Michigan Univ. experiment:  confederate calling students ass hole.
      Facial anger, cortisol, firm handshake, hypothetical revenge story response,
      were different for southern than northern students
          Southerners, not herdsmen, not from Kentucky, not herdsmen,
          parents were Coke-Cola executives
    Success depends on: where/when born, parents, how you grew up
      AND traditions/attitudes from fore-bearers

7. Ethnic theory of plane crashes
     In real low-fuel emergency, co-pilot is nonchalant (mellow) ,a uses
        "mitigated speech" - downplay when polite, embarrassed, or deferential
           to authority; reduce the cockpit "power distance index"
        Most crashes happen when captain instead of first officer is flying.
      Korean Air: removed from Delta partnership, not used US military,e
         threatened to be blocked from Canadian airspace, Korean president
         switched to Asiana (other Korean airlines)
         Crew becomes assertive too late; only when disaster stare at the face
      Crew resource management: eliminate mitigation; teach junior offers to
        communicate clearly and assertively; in steps:
        1. "Captain I am concerned.."
        2. "Captain I am uncomfortable.."
        3. "Captain I believe that is no safe.."
        4. take-over
        ---> Better do not use "captain":
             Captain and 1st officer should call each other by first name!
        Tower: Is it OK with your fuel?
        Co-pilot: I guess so. Thank you very much. (before crash)
           Cause: pilots were Colombian (high PDI) - intimidated by Tower....
     Hofstede psychologist worked for IBM, asked people how they solved
       problems, how they worked together, how to deal with authority....
       --> "individualism-collectivism scale";
          USA (no health care) 91
          --> Guatemala 6
       --> "uncertainly avoidance"
          Greece (most likely to stick to rules, regardless of cost)  100 -->
              Singapore (best ambiguity tolerance) 8
       Personality is on top tendencies/assumptions/reflexes handed down to us.
       Danes Belgians: very close but different history, food, in uncertainly avoidance
       "power Distance index": afraid to speak up to managers
          low PDI country: Austrian prime minister uses street car
          high PDI France, Belgium not so...
          French (higher PDI) have more managers, pay them more than Germans
          Malaysia (104), Guatemala (95) ---> Israel (13),  Austria (11)
       Korean: 6 levels of addressing: 1 formal deference, 2 informal deference,
         3 blunt, 4 familiar, 5 intimate, 6 plain
         Lower rank: wait to sit down, eat, smoke, hide drinking glass,bow;
         "There is order even in drinking cold water"
         Superior: I kind of hungry [why don't you buy me something]
         Inferior: How about a drink {i will buy a drink for you}
       West/Asian communication is transmitter/receiver oriented;
         speaker must be clear / listener must listen carefully
       Korean air solution: English mandatory in the cockpit;
         give crew opportunity to transform their work & they took it.
       1994 Boeing published correlation of accident rates and PDI;
         "we are not saying there something but we think there is something";
         ignoring cultural disposition causes plane crashes

8. Rice Paddies and Math Tests
     "night soil" (human waste) traditional fertilizer
     rice is life in south China
     China, Japan, Korea: transparent math
        ten-on, ten-two instead of eleven thirteen
        --> kids learn to count sooner - easier to do 37+22
         "out of 5 parts , take 3" instead of 3 fifths
     China, Japan, Korea, Singapore 98% percentile
     England, Germany...  26%-36%
     Korean culture, not good for flying airplanes, good for math...
     Rice paddy: as big as hotel room
        skill oriented - weed, fertilize, water, keep clay-pan
        (in Kalahari, gather Mongongo nuts instead of farming)
        10x to 20x more work than wheat/corn
        meaningful & complex, like NY garment industry, WO feudalism
     Feudal Russia: "If God does not bring it, the earth will not give it";
        fatalism, pessimism
     China: "hard work, shrewd planning and self-reliance or corporation
             with small group will in time bring recompense"
            "no food WO blood & sweat"
            "in winter lazy man freezes to death"
            "no one who rises before dawn 360 days/year fails to be rich"
     Moth more about attitude, doggedness, persistence than ability
     Ability to excel math test, and answer questionnaire is same.
       --> know the math score if you know how hard one works
           (rice agriculture culture; Japan...top MIT students from south China)
     American/American Japanese 1st graders worked 9.5/14 minutes on puzzle

9. Marita's Bargain
     Early education:in summer, 35 students/class;
        published "Relation of Education and insanity"
        tried to reduce time studying to protect the mind
        effort balanced with rest
     Rice paddy gets nutrients from water - more used the better
     Wheat gets nutrient from soil - soil left fallow to recover
     Similar for education
     rich/poor 1st graders similar test scores
        ''     5th graders have 6% achievement gap
       --> June/September tests:
          poor students same or better / rich students better
          --> rich/poor kids do/do-not learn in summer
    US/Korea/Japan school year: 180/220/243 days (260 max; 5/12 Japan/US vacations)
    No school problem but summer vacation problem
      KIPP (knowledge is Power Program) schools brought rice paddy to US
        7:30AM - 5:00PM,  5:00-7:00PM optional
        Saturday 9:00-1:00, Summer 8:00-2:00  incentives/rewards/discipline
        Extra time for more relaxed atmosphere
        Long commute - 12-yr olds wake up before 5:30, may go sleep at 11:00
        Bargain:
          free time --> school time --> college (80% of KIPP students)
        success = opportunity + willingness to get it

    Students do not need shiny school, phd teachers, big apartment, high IQ..
      need only a chance, & knowing meaningful work

10. Jamaican story
      White with black concubines, have mulatto kids, ruthless to black slaves
      Darker members of mulatto families kept out of way
        White and light totem pole
        Mother would disowned darker daughter
      outliers products of  history, community, legacy, opportunity, chance
