The tipping point, how little things can make a big difference  by Malcolm Gladwell     🗓 2000
(Principles of epidemic transmissions
)

Intro
  Hush Puppies shoes went from couple NY hipsters to every mall in America in 1996.
  Within 5 years, in 1997, NY murder rate dropped 65%, all crime 50%
    --> products ideas behave like virus epidemics (correlation/causality criticism;
        disorder / serious-crime relationship
        is modest)
     (1. contagious behavior
         Yawing - seeing or reading it
      2. little has big difference - geometric progression
         height of folding and cutting piece of paper 50 times - goes to the sun
      3. sudden change; Tipping point: dramatic moment in epidemic
        - critical mass, threshold, boiling point
         20% blacks - whites fled to suburbs
         1987 for fax machines, 1997 for cell phones
         neighborhoods with 5% professional jobs
         32 F and rain turning to snow
  How can we start and control positive our own epidemics?

1. The three rules of epidemics
   Causes of 1995 Baltimore syphilis epidemic:
     1. CDC: crack cocaine/risky behavior
          (disease context)
     2. Medical school: reduction of medical services for the poor
          (disease itself)
     3. epidemiologist: demolition of old housing, boarding row houses
         --> housing dislocation
          (people-disease carriers)
   Similar, but more extreme, to 80/20 law:
     20% of people do 80% of work, 20% cause 80% of accidents...
   1. Law of the few: few charmers set social trends
   2. Stickiness (in mind): "Winston tastes good like a cigarette should" (as-->like)
      make contagious messages memorable
   3. Power of context:
      woman attacked & no one called for help - everyone assumed others called
   April 18, 1775: boy hears British saying "hell to pay tomorrow";
     same day 10:00 PM Paul Revere rides and warns in Lexington 12:00 AM
     (When Revere died a lot of people attended..)
     Dawes does the same to Waltham but WO same effect
       Reveres are the "connectors", "mavens", "salesmen"
   Six degrees of separation:
     Milgram sent 160 people in Omaha Nebraska name and address of stockbroker
     and told them to send letter to whoever may deliver the packet
     --> person known after 5 to 6 letters
     Most went through 3 people before stockbroker
        --> small number of people are linked to everyone
     Friends: proximity; people that do the things that we do - not that they think alike
       --> we do not seek friends, connectors enable us to have friends
     Estimate number of friends/acquaintances: got trough a random list of last names

2. The law of the few:
  1. Connector: have lots of "weak ties"- friendly & casual connections - persuade
    traits: curiosity, self-confidence, sociability, energy, live (ed) in many worlds
    by instinct can relate to people; "I never met a man I didn't like."
     honest, plain-spoken, decent, powerful
    Person or idea/product closer to connector more power & opportunity
  2. Maven (expert; information specialists):
    Price vigilantes; market mavens: know something is not a promotion; socially motivated
    willing to solve their problem/needs by solving other people's problems
    teacher/student; educate/help not persuade
  Non-verbal cues:
    Newscaster smiled more on Republican candidates --> Republican bias/persuasion
    People nodding their head as exercise, more agreeable to pay more tuition
  Cultural micro-rhythm (gesture & conversation):
    speaker dances to his speech
    thousands form motions that compels us to respond positively or negatively
    babies-adults even human-ape interactions
    Persuader has super-reflex to draw someone into their rhythm; cannot be resisted
      good speakers/musicians/teachers/salesmen do this
  3. Sender (salesman):
     good at expressing emotions
     "Emotional contagion": infect others with emotions by smiling, frowning...
     --> like carrier of disease; other people are more susceptible
   Affective communication test:
     high scorers transferred their emotions to low scorers WO speaking in 2 min.
   American revolution:
     started by stable boy,  salesmen, connectors & mavens

3. Stickiness factor:
   Sesame street: learning epidemic; antidote to poverty/illiteracy epidemic
     if you hold attention of children to educate them
     shows tested with distracter slide show- Escher drawings, rainbows...
       goal 85 to 90% attention
       3 min sketches
       did not like 2 people speaking at once
     Defied psychologists by mixing reality/fantasy to hold attention
     Eye tracking showed kids focuses more on letter than Muppet - no so with Oscar
     Pay attention to material structure and format to increase stickiness
   stickiness: quality of message - memorable
   direct marketers, teachers, managers: stickiness students
   Average American exposed to 254 messages/day;
   Clutter problem: makes messages harder to stick
   Blues clues: improvement of sesame st.
     removed adult jokes, kept attention longer, used repetition
     same show 5 times a week - kids repeated watching understanding more each time
     order clues for suspense
   The quality of the idea is not what makes an impact - nuanced packaging does

4. Power of Context - part 1; NY crime
   Broken windows theory:  People assume no one cares, will break more windows
     --> graffiti, public disorder, aggressive panhandling embolden criminals
     put in practice in NY:  train graffiti (3 night job) painted over when finished
        fare cheaters handcuffed and daisy-chained for public display
          bus converted to police station - quick arrests and screening;
          criminals left their guns home
        arrested for peeing
     ***Elimination of minor quality of life crimes was the tipping point.****
   Criminals, genetic, dis-functional environment, or amoral upbringing
     are sensitive to environmental cues
   Behavior is result of social context
   Preferences/emotions influenced by newscaster smile, graffiti...
   Zimbardo's mock prison experiment:
     Are prisons bad because of people or the environment?
     First night at 2:00 AM guards made prisoners do push ups
     Second morning prisoners rebelled
     Guards became more cruel and sadistic
     After 36 hours some prisoners being hysterical were released
     2-week experiment stopped after 6 days
     Certain situations overwhelm inherent predispositions (genes, upbringing..)
   Given the ability to cheat, test scores increased by 50%
     smart or younger or happy family kids cheat less, girls as much as boys
     cheating dependent on content and situation not time
     --> lying, cheating, stealing depends on situation, age, intelligence...
         Counter-intuitive because we think of it as absolute
   Vervet monkeys very intelligent communicating withe other vervets
      but no for seeing python tracks, see carcass hanging on tree
   Fundamental Attribution Error (FAE): we are like vervets;
     we underestimate overestimate character traits
     and underestimate situation/context; examples:
       People shooting baskets in well/poor lit gym....
       Contestants think questioners are smarter, students vs teachers...
       Birth order (domineering, conservative vs rebellious..)
       People rushed on giving a talk were not good Samaritans;
         context matters more than conviction
     use shorthand avoid making lots of decisions
     Character is not what it is - it is what we want it at a time/context
   Idea epidemic = few people + sticky message + context
   Peer/community influence more important than family (to how kids turn out)
   Prison/New York experiments: better off in clean streets
   If your are in combat situation, rat hole, thoughts/memory/vision is off
   If you tell seminarian to hurry - he will ignore people in distress

5. Power of Context - part 2; magic 150
   Small close-knit groups (150 member) magnify idea epidemic
     Book clubs read & imitated "Ya ya sisterhood"
     Apostle Paul, Bill Graham, Wesley (created Methodist religion)...
   Channel capacity: can separate 5 high pitch and 5 low pitch notes, mix them up
     you can separate only 6, similar sweetness of drinks, remember a number...
     ---> "The magic number 7" (limitation of nervous system)
     A list of people whose death would devastate you  ~ 12
       (limit is time/energy you can think about)
   Social channel capacity (evolutionary psychology):
     Size of neocortex is proportional to primate group size. Elephants too.
     Belong to group of 5:
       4 relationships with others + (4!/2!(4-2)! = 6 pair relationship of others)
         =10
       group of 20:
         19 + 20!/2!(20-2)! = 19 + 20*19/2 ~ 200
       4x group --> 20x relationships
     Dunbar equation: group size ~ size ratio of neocortex to brain; 150 for humans
       Walbiri of Australia, Tauade of New Guinea, Ammassalik of Greenland,
       Ona of Tierra del Fuego average village size: 148.4
       military groups < 200
       Hutterites (anabaptist Germans --> Russia --> west Canada/US)
         settlements split after 150 size - under 150 is most efficient management
     Gore Associates: everyone is associate - no titles
       founder found above 150/50,000ft^2 things get clumsy
       peer pressure instead of boss pressure
     When people know one another they create a joint memory system;
       transactive memory: groups collectively encode, store, and retrieve knowledge
         teen is computer expert because he has been assigned to it
         women childcare experts
         small hi-tech company - know passion abilities of others
     to create a large epidemic have to create smaller epidemics

6. Case study - rumors sneakers & power of transaction
   Diffusion model: adoption of new corn seeds;
     Innovators --> early adopters --> early majority --> late majority
   For less sticky things:
     liberals --> conservatives  (need translation to "diffuse")
     create rumor; 1045 Chinese visitor asking for directions became  the Japanese spy
     Memory changes to what is familiar & to what has emotional significance
       search for meaning --> condense & fill in to get better Gestalt & closure
   Connectors/Mavens/Salesmen translate innovators for
    the rest of us.
   Ad agency: innovator correspondents music, TV shows, clothes, aspirations
     put same ideas in their ads - Tibet trend --> Tibet monk ad
     piggy back on social epidemics
     take cultural cues and level, sharpen them to more coherent
   Going mainstream ended Airwalk shoe epidemic

6. Case study - suicide, smoking & search if un-sticky cigarette
   1:5,000 suicide US rate for 15-24 year males,
     7x in Micronesia - for father yelling, not having graduation gown..
       in songs, graffiti, T shirts, younger boys want to "try it"
   contrarian teens smoke when they know smoking is bad;
     smoking in US is like suicide in Micronesia
   Suicides: +12% when Marilyn Monroe died
     local/national suicide news increase local/national suicide & traffic accidents
     like advertisements - it is Ok to do it
     Permission for suicide is for specific people & situation
       Suicide is form of language for a social subgroup
     Advertisements for depressed persons: news, escape movies, religious sermon
   Micronesia: suicides of wealthy man who had kids with 2 different women
     more suicides for similar reasons
   Hard core smoker: extrovert, takes chances, impulsive, sociable, aggressive,
     19 year college girls: 15%/55% of non-smokers/smokers had sex
     Smoking was never coll, smokers were cool
   chipper: intermittent smoker not addicted to nicotine
     similar to social drinker - all start as chippers some become heavy smokers
     From mice studies, hard core smokers more nicotine tolerant;
       chipper get nicotine pleasure but cannot handle large does
   contagious/stickiness properties of messenger/message
   1. Stop smoking contagion:
      a. prevent the permission givers (the cool) - difficult do not listen
      b. convince teens to look to adults instead of the cool teens
         (parents think they influence kids but they do not)
         Colorado Adoption Project: biological/adopted kids have/do not have
           parent intelligence & personality
           --> parents cannot raise us in their image
           environmental influence is large but nothing to do with parents
             it is about peers
             kids of smokers 2x likely to smoke but not because of parent example
             parents give genes but have no social influence
             health risks is adult propaganda, but danger attracts teens
   2. Stop smoking stickiness (forget the smoking salesman - is bad..):
      Ideal: a nicotine lowering tolerance pill for heavy smokers
      Actual: nicotine patch, but too slow; drip-drip is not a tipping point
      a. Smoking linked to depression/psychiatric problems
         50%/90% of depressed/schizophrenic smoke
         Prozac (fluoxetine) delays the reuptake of serotonin, letting last longer
         Nicotine similar with dopamine & neorepinephrine;
           to smokers is self-medication --> ultimate stickiness
           Bupropion (zyban)treats depression and enables smokers to quit
      b. Nicotine addiction: 5 cigarettes/day (5 mg nicotine) 3 years  5 mg nicotine
         Make cigarettes with 5mg/30 cigarettes
         Teen can continue smoking & being cool
         Accept experimentation but ensure that it is safer
      Boys attempting suicide saw/heard when 8; imitate or experiment late when 11
        no safer suicide but can have safer smoking

Conclusion
  Breast cancer awareness program not working in churches
    worked in beauty salons
  Solutions not intuitive:
    big bird same set as adults, limit workers to less than 150
  We are suggestible by what we see/hear & context
  Social change is volatile & inexpicable
  Manipulate:
    size of group
    presentation of info for stickiness
  Find:
    special people with social power
  For intelligent action via tipping point
