Write/think/learn more clearly           Michael A. Covington AI professor
http://www.covingtoninnovations.com/mc/WriteThinkLearn.pdf

why write more clearly?:
  to influence people
  get clearer thinking
  to know what you know

Myths:
  1. writing is mostly fiction
     fact: most writing is for information
           done be people that do not like fiction
  2. need to memorize grammar rules
     fact: Grammar is not the problem
           if you know what you are trying to say.
           Language is inborn, comes before grammar;
           do not need to classify language parts.
           Need ~3% of grammar book

How to write:
  1. Unselfish perspective
     Do what is easy for reader
     Write because reader is important
     Not demand reader to put up with
       your spelling/organization/sloppiness
     Package info to enter your head as easily possible
  2. Too complicated --> do it in steps:
      1. Plan - what and how to write
         Why write?
         To who? -
           if one gave you this info, how should it be
         What does reader know/expect/want?
         How to organize it?
           Like a machine design or computer program
             every section with purpose
               with sub-sections/sub-purposes
           May take random list of ideas and sort them.
           No need to write sections in order;
             may write intro last
         What is the style/format requirements?
      2. Draft - write once
           not elegant/perfect
           to get it off your brain
           no worry with grammar/spelling
           focus on what and how
           3 rules : 3x "Get to the point"
           State main point before the reasoning
             (no detective story)
             Main point in first paragraph sentence;
               lot people read only that.
           KISS: use clearest/simplest language
             no stuffy/big words
             no word that you know exactly
      3. Revise - write it better
           fun/easy with computers
           better ways to put ideas into words
           pretend to be your own worst enemy
           can anything be misunderstood?
           remove needless words
           n words --> n^3 processing time
             “One of the best things you can do for yourself
              to improve your writing is to learn how to cut
              out words that are not necessary.” (25) -->
             "To improve your writing, cut out unnecessary words." (8)
      4. Edit - spelling, grammar
           computer does not know best
           be better speller:
             recognize related words
             pronounce words carefully
      5. Format - layout, fonts..
          KISS
          only standard layouts/practice
          no meaningless variation - avoid distraction & looking stupid
          2-3 fonts with clear purpose
          do not get reader's eye to anything other than main point
          do not mix “smart”/"straight"  quotes
          reader expects format change means something

2. How to think
  1. Language (philosophy of) or other symbolic representation
     How to know if you know what a word means?
       know "dog" because you can see it among other things
       we have imprecise meanings
         maybe usable:
            So and so has lots of elms (I cannot identify elms
              but trust other people to do so)
            Want "object-oriented database":
              rely on authority of making a fool of oneself
       should know meaning
    How to know what a sentence means?
      --> know if it is true or false
      "all dogs are brown" --> find if all dogs in world are brown
  2. Logic
       "Murder is wrong": cannot be proved true/false by physical tests
          (it is not neither of meaningless)
        "There are undetectable elves here" : meaningless; true/false meaningless
          "Everything happens exactly the way it was fated to happen"
          deep sounding and as meaningless
  3. Epistemology
       (theory of knowledge;
        the investigation of what distinguishes justified belief from opinion)
       How to get knowledge by observation
         goal: believe/disbelieve what is true/false
       Scientific method is a part of epistemology
       Form belief based on knowledge:
         1. propose a belief (hypothesis)
            (something worth knowing - not a waste of effort)
         2. try to confirm if
         3. try to disprove it
       Conjecture (guess) --> opinion supported by evidence
         --> firm belief, thoroughly tested
